Java enums? With extra Visitor please! (#125)
ippontech/blog-usa: posts/java-enums-with-extra-visitor-please.md

---
authors:
- Grégory ELHAIMER
tags:
- Java
- Software Development
- Software Craftmanship
date: 2019-05-28T12:21:50.000Z
title: "Java enums? With extra Visitor please!"
image: 
---

Enums can be seen as a group of strongly typed constants. They are usefull to a several use cases: attribute a strong semantic to values, limit and validate available values for data, enhance code readability etc.

> Using enums can be, however, tricky when it is about making decision according to its values. As the enum evolves, every part of the code where it has been used as a condition must be checked. If a lot of decisions has been based upon enum's values, maintaining the code base can become a nightmare: one forgotten verification can lead to a corruption of the system as a whole.

Reviewer: Me neither, i'll commit your suggestion and keep the conversation opened in case anyone has the answer

        case ENERGY: return new EnergyBehavior();
        case AGRICULTURAL: return new AgriculturalBehavior();
        default: throw new Exception("Unexpected asset class");
    }
}
```

The swith-case statement is probably the most straightforward way to do. It has, however, several flaws.

The method `getAssetClassBehavior()` returns a behavior according to the value of `AssetClass`. Defining a default behavior then becomes mandatory, even if, in this example, all the values of `AssetClass` enum are handled. To do so, we can either return a default implementation of `AssetClassBehavior` or null or throw an exception.

Using this defaulting mechanism silences any adding of new value inside the enum. It requires to check any piece of code using `AssetClass` as a conditioner without any guarantee that an oversight has been avoided.

The last problem is probably the least obvious. Using the switch-case statement generates a strong coupling between the business logic and the enum's values, breaking the open/close principle.
Yet, the switch-case statement has no interest in knowing if the asset class is an enum or an object or anything else. Only the semantic matters.

> For instance, metals could be split into two sub assets: base metals and precious metals. Any already existing code based on `AssetClass.METAL` will have to be reworked to take this change into account. No business value has been added where the rework was necessary while it exposed a working implementation to the risk of regressions.

Reviewer: The same comment has been made about the FR version. I corrected it and will do so for the EN version as well

> For instance, metals could be split into two sub assets: base metals and precious metals. Any already existing code based on `AssetClass.METAL` will have to be reworked to take this change into account. No business value has been added where the rework was necessary while it exposed a working implementation to the risk of regressions.

Reviewer: What do you think about:

 Any code based on `AssetClass.METAL` will have to be reworked to take those two new values into account. This refactoring will bring no new business value but will exposing an already working feature to the risk of regressions.

> For instance, metals could be split into two sub assets: base metals and precious metals. Any already existing code based on `AssetClass.METAL` will have to be reworked to take this change into account. No business value has been added where the rework was necessary while it exposed a working implementation to the risk of regressions.

Reviewer 2: Any code based on `AssetClass.METAL` will have to be reworked to take those two new values into account. This refactoring will not bring any new business value, but will instead expose an already working feature to the risk of regressions.

}
```

```java
public interface AssetClassVisitor<T> {
    T visitMetal();
    T visitEnergy();
    T visitAgricultural();
    // The new method
    T visitLiveStockAndMeat();
}
```

After this, the code will light up like a Christmas Tree: it does not compile anymore. Et compiler should be thanked for doing such a great job! All those highlighted errors show that some part of the code are not designed to handle the new value yet. Let's correct this using an exception: the existing features are not available yet for livestock and meat.

```java
assetClass.accept(new AssetClassVisitor<AssetClassBehavior>() {
    @Override
    public AssetClassBehavior visitMetal() {
        return new MetalBehavior();
    }

    @Override
    public AssetClassBehavior visitEnergy() {
        return new EnergyBehavior();
    }

    @Override
    public AssetClassBehavior visitAgricultural() {
        return new AgriculturalBehavior();
    }

    @Override
    public AssetClassBehavior visitLiveStockAndMeat() {
        throw new NotImplementedException("This feature is not enabled yet for livestock and meat.")
    }
});
```
 
# In a nutshell

> During one of my mission, the team was facing a huge number of enums and many business logic was based upon their values. The visitor pattern was our shield against unpredicted edge cases. It became the standard way to deal with enum in the whole code base.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During one of my missions, the team was dealing with a large number of enums and there was business logic based upon their values. The visitor pattern was our shield against unpredicted edge cases. It became our standard way to deal with enums in the code base.
```

---
authors:
- Grégory ELHAIMER
tags:
- Java
- Software Development
- Software Craftmanship
date: 2019-05-28T12:21:50.000Z

> title: "Java enums? With extra Visitor please!"

Reviewer 2: "Java Enums? With extra Visitor, please!"

image: 
---

> Enums can be seen as a group of strongly typed constants. Their several use cases include: attributing a strong semantic to values, limiting and validating available values for data, enhancing code readability, etc.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Enums can be seen as a group of strongly typed constants. Their several use cases include: attributing strong semantics to values, limiting and validating available values for data, and enhancing code readability.
```

> However, using enums can be tricky when it comes to making decisions according to its values. As the enum evolves, each part of the code where it has been used as a condition must be checked. If many decisions have been based on an enum's values, maintaining the code base can be a nightmare; one forgotten verification can lead to corruption of the whole system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using enums can be tricky when it comes to making decisions according to its values. As the enum evolves, each part of the code where it has been used as a condition must be checked. If many decisions have been based on an enum's values, maintaining the code base can be a nightmare. A single missed verification can lead to corruption of the entire system.
```

> But is there a way to reduce the impact of enums' evolutions on the code base?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Is there a way to reduce the impact of enums' impact on the code base?
```

# The switch-case approach

> Consider the `AssetClass` enum which represents the different group of tradable commodities:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Consider the `AssetClass` enum which represents distinct groups of tradable commodities:
```

```java
public enum AssetClass {
    METAL,
    ENERGY,
    AGRICULTURAL,
}
```

This enum can be used to decide which strategy, mapper or any other behavior to use according to the value of `AssetClass`. A general example of this is given in the following code:

```java
public AutomatedTradingStrategy getAutomatedTradingStrategy(AssetClass assetClass) {
    switch (assetClass) {
        case METAL:return new HedgingStrategy();
        case ENERGY: return new SwingTradingStrategy();
        case AGRICULTURAL:
        default: return DayTradingStrategy();
    }
}
```

The switch-case statement is probably the most straightforward way to do this. However, it has several flaws.

The method `getAutomatedTradingStrategy()` returns a behavior according to the value of `AssetClass`. Defining a default behavior then becomes mandatory, even if in this example all the values of `AssetClass` enum are handled. We can do this by either returning a default implementation of `AutomatedTradingStrategy`, null, or throwing an exception.

> Using this defaulting mechanism silences any addition of a new value inside the enum. It requires a check of any piece of code using `AssetClass` as a conditioner without any guarantee that an oversight has been avoided.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Even though each enum value should have a handler adding a default handler here ensures that there is some way to handle an arbitrary `AssetClass`.  This is helpful when an enum value has been added but is missed in other parts of the codebase.
```

> Even though each enum value should have a handler adding a default handler here ensures that there is some way to handle an arbitrary `AssetClass`.  This is helpful when an enum value has been added but is missed in other parts of the codebase.

Reviewer 2: Even though each enum value should have a handler, adding a default handler here ensures that there is some way to handle an arbitrary `AssetClass`.

> The last problem is probably the least obvious. Using the switch-case statement generates a strong coupling between the business logic and the enum's values, breaking the open/close principle.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The last problem is probably the least obvious. Using the switch-case statement generates a strong coupling between the business logic and the enum's values, breaking the (open-closed principle)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open%E2%80%93closed_principle].
```

Yet, the switch-case statement has no interest in knowing if the asset class is an enum, object, or anything else. Only the semantic matters.
For instance, metals could be split into two sub assets: base metals and precious metals. Any already existing code based on `AssetClass.METAL` will have to be reworked to take this change into account. No business value has been added where the rework was necessary while it exposed a working implementation to the risk of regressions.

> # Visitor pattern to the rescue

Reviewer 2: Visitor Pattern to the Rescue

> How can we break this coupling while offering the ability to contextualize the decision making to the enum's values? The answer is in the title: let's use the Visitor pattern.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
How can we break this coupling while offering the ability to contextualize the decision making to the enum's values? The answer is in the title: let's use the (Visitor pattern)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern].
```

> First off, we need to create an interface which will be used as a contract between the enum and the code relying on its values.

Reviewer 2: First, we need to create an interface which will be used as a contract between the enum and the code relying on its values.

```java
public interface AssetClassVisitor<T> {
    T visitMetal();
    T visitEnergy();
    T visitAgricultural();
}
```

The interface is generic to allow implementations whose purpose differs according to the context.

> Now it's necessary to update the enum to make it accept any implementation of the `AssetClassVisitor`.

Reviewer 2: It is now necessary to update the enum to make it accept _any_ implementation of the `AssetClassVisitor`.

        public <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor) {
            return visitor.visitMetal();
        }
    },
    ENERGY {
        @Override
        public <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor) {
            return visitor.visitEnergy();
        }
    },
    AGRICULTURAL {
        @Override
        public <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor) {
            return visitor.visitAgricultural();
        }
    };

    public abstract <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor);
}
```

The code is now ready to forget the switch-case and use an implementation of the `AssetClassVisitor`:

```java
public AutomatedTradingStrategy getAutomatedTradingStrategy(AssetClass assetClass) {
    return assetClass.accept(new AssetClassVisitor<AutomatedTradingStrategy>() {
        @Override
        public AutomatedTradingStrategy visitMetal() {
            return new HedgingStrategy();
        }

        @Override
        public AutomatedTradingStrategy visitEnergy() {
            return new SwingTradingStrategy();
        }

        @Override
        public AutomatedTradingStrategy visitAgricultural() {
            return new DayTradingStrategy();
        }
    });
}
```

> It can be observed that each value of `AssetClass` is responsible for calling the appropriate method of `AssetClassVisitor`. Values of `AssetClass` can now be ignored as the semantic is brought by the visitor. `AssetClass.AGRICULTURAL` could be renamed `AssetClass.AGRI` without changes where the business logic occurs.

Reviewer 2: Each value of `AssetClass` is responsible for calling the appropriate method of `AssetClassVisitor`.

Furthermore, handling default behavior is not required anymore. Possibilities are now scoped to the one provided by the interface.

> # Add a new asset class

Reviewer 2: Add a new Asset Class

The business is growing and activities are extending to livestock and meat. 
This is as simple as adding `AssetClass.LIVESTOCK_AND_MEAT` value and updating the visitor interface.

```java
public enum AssetClass {
    METAL {
        @Override
        public <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor) {
            return visitor.visitMetal();
        }
    },
    ENERGY {
        @Override
        public <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor) {
            return visitor.visitEnergy();
        }
    },
    AGRICULTURAL {
        @Override
        public <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor) {
            return visitor.visitAgricultural();
        }
    },
    // The new value
    LIVESTOCK_AND_MEAT {
        @Override
        public <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor) {
            return visitor.visitLiveStockAndMeat();
        }
    };

    public abstract <E> E accept(AssetClassVisitor<E> visitor);
}
```

```java
public interface AssetClassVisitor<T> {
    T visitMetal();
    T visitEnergy();
    T visitAgricultural();
    // The new method
    T visitLiveStockAndMeat();
}
```

> After this, the code will light up like a Christmas Tree: it does not compile anymore. The compiler should be thanked for doing such a great job! All those highlighted errors show that some part of the code is not designed to handle the new value yet. Let's correct this by using an exception: the existing features are not available yet for livestock and meat.

Reviewer 2: All of those highlighted errors show that some part of the code is not designed to handle the new value yet. Let's correct this by using an exception: the existing features are not yet available for livestock and meat.

```java
public AutomatedTradingStrategy getAutomatedTradingStrategy(AssetClass assetClass) {
    return assetClass.accept(new AssetClassVisitor<AutomatedTradingStrategy>() {
        @Override
        public AutomatedTradingStrategy visitMetal() {
            return new HedgingStrategy();
        }

        @Override
        public AutomatedTradingStrategy visitEnergy() {
            return new SwingTradingStrategy();
        }

        @Override
        public AutomatedTradingStrategy visitAgricultural() {
            return new DayTradingStrategy();
        }

        @Override
        public AutomatedTradingStrategy visitLiveStockAndMeat() {
            throw new AutomatedTradingNotSupported("Automated trading for Livestock and meat is not allowed.")
        }
    });
}
```
 

> # In a nutshell

Reviewer 2: In a Nutshell

> During one of my missions, the team was dealing with a large number of enums and there was business logic based upon their values. The visitor pattern was our shield against unpredicted edge cases. It became our standard way to deal with enums in the code base.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
During one of my projects, the team was dealing with a large number of enums and there was business logic based upon their values. The visitor pattern was our shield against unpredicted edge cases. It became our standard way to deal with enums in the code base.
```

> During one of my projects, the team was dealing with a large number of enums and there was business logic based upon their values. The visitor pattern was our shield against unpredicted edge cases. It became our standard way to deal with enums in the code base.

Reviewer 2: The visitor pattern was our shield against unpredictable edge cases.

> Using this pattern is not necessary if your enums are purely descriptive. However, bringing the heavy artillery is definitively worth the extra cost. Breaking the coupling between enum's values and the business logic offers flexibility while the compiler provides an instantaneous feedback about potential oversight and edge cases.

Reviewer 2: Breaking the coupling between an enum's values and the business logic offers flexibility, while the compiler provides an instantaneous feedback about potential oversight and edge cases.
